Smyrna Chapel
Just up the road about 100 meters from the pheasant is a Baptist Chapel that was built in 1706 called Smyrna Chapel.
It claims to be the oldest Welsh Baptist Chapel in use today.
This chapel is said to be built on the site of an old barn where a local farmer allowed a group of Penevi
Baptists to hold their prayer meetings in the 1600s.
The congregation was established by a group of non-conformists who originally met in a secret cave cut out of the hillside.
Worshippers risked heavy fines, imprisonment, transportation and even death due to the temporary Convectical Act of 1664.
This act allowed for the severe punishment of people over the age of 16 who attended these gatherings.
The act prescribed penalties on worshippers in the following manner.
An assembly Convectical or meeting under colour or pretense of any exercise of religion in any other manner than according to the liturgy and practice of the Church of England.
The organ in Smyrna Chapel has been there since 1976.
Its original home was the Holy Trinity Church in the Rhondda before being donated to Smyrna Chapel, Penevi by Mr. Geoffrey Lloyd.
The organ was, apparently, in very poor condition and would need extensive, loving repairs to bring it back into use.
It had to be stripped down to over 1,000 parts to make it ready for transport.
This dilapidated array of components was received probably with some trepidation by Mr. Peter David and his friend David Spratt.
There then followed seven months of painstaking work as parts were repaired and reassembled by the pair, with the help and supervision of expert Compton Whitone, an organ builder from Bridgend.
Then, in October 1976, the work was finished and the first notes, in public at least, were played by Mr. David at a special service to commemorate its restoration and installation in its new home, Smyrna Chapel, Penevi.
A book written to celebrate Smyrna Chapel's 300th anniversary was published in 2006.
Thank you for watching!